[developer-docs] Add preliminary type system docs. (#8096)
pulumi/pulumi: developer-docs/architecture/type-system.md

each language SDK and interchange format to ensure that these semantics are faithfully
implemented, ideally in as idiomatic a fashion as possible.

## Primitive Types

The core primitives of the Pulumi type system form a superset of the JSON type system, and supports the
following types:

- `Null`, which represents the lack of a value
- `Bool`, which represents a boolean value
- `Number`, which represents an IEEE-754 double-precision number
- `String`, which represents a sequence of UTF-8 encoded unicode code points
- [`Asset`](#assets-and-archives), which represents a blob
- [`Archive`](#assets-and-archives), which represents a map from strings to `Asset`s or
  `Archive`s
- [`ResourceReference`](#resource-references), which represents a reference to a resource
- `Array<T>`, which represents a numbered sequence of values of a particular type
- `Map<T>`, which represents an unordered mapping from strings to values of a particular
  type
- `Union<T0, T1 ... TN>`, which represents a value of one of a fixed set of types
- `Enum<T, V0 ... VN>`, which represents one of a fixed set of values of a particular type

### Assets and Archives

> An `Asset` or `Archive` may contain either literal data or a reference to a file or URL.
> In the former case, the literal data is a textual string or a map from strings to `Asset`s
> or `Archive`s, respectively. In the latter case, the referenced file or URL is an opaque
> blob or a TAR, gzipped TAR, or ZIP archive, respectively.

Reviewer: I find this paragraph a little difficult to follow because of the distinction of `Asset` vs `Archive` mixed with the distinction between `literal data` and `reference to a fail or URL`.

Maybe something like the following is easier to follow?
```suggestion
An `Asset` or `Archive` may contain either literal data or a reference to a file or URL.

* Literal data:
	* Asset: a text string
	* Archive: a map from strings to `Asset`s or other `Archive`s
* Reference to a file or URL:
	* Asset: Opaque blob
	* Archive: TAR, gzipped TAR or ZIP archive
```

Reviewer: Maybe even a table 🤷🏽 ?

Author: Rewrote it as two paragraphs: one for assets and one for archives. PTAL

Reviewer: 👍🏽

Each `Asset` or `Archive` also carries the SHA-256 hash of its contents. This hash can be
used to uniquely identify the asset (e.g. for locally caching `Asset` or `Archive`
contents).

### Resource References

> A `ResourceReference` represents a reference to a resource . Although

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `ResourceReference` represents a reference to a resource. Although
```

all that is necessary to uniquely identify a resource within the context of a stack is its

> URN, a `ResourceReference` also carries the resource's ID (if it is not a component)) and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
URN, a `ResourceReference` also carries the resource's ID (if it is not a component) and
```

the version of the provider that manages the resource. If the contents of the referenced
resource must be inspected, the reference must be resolved by invoking the `getResource`
function of the engine's builtin provider. Note that this is only possible if there is a 
connection to the engine's resource monitor, e.g. within the scope of a call to `Construct`.
This implies that resource references may not be resolved within calls to other 
provider methods. Therefore, configuration values, custom resources and provider functions
should not rely on the ability to resolve resource references, and should instead treat
resource references  as either their ID (if present) or URN. If the ID is present and
empty, it should be treated as an [`Unknown`](#unknowns).

## Object Types

Object types are defined as mapping from property names to property types. Duplicate
property names are not allowed, and each property name maps to a single type.

## `Promise<T>`

> Like promises in other systems, a value of type `Promise<T>` represents the result of an

Reviewer 2: I think starting with a  reference to "other systems" is more confusing then helpful. I think it's much clearer to say 
```
`Promise<T>` represents the result of an asynchronous computation of type `T` or it's failure. 
```
As an aside, what is the type of a failure to resolve a promise? Should we mention that type (if it exists).

Author: > I think starting with a reference to "other systems" is more confusing then helpful.

Fair enough--I'll make that change 👍 

> As an aside, what is the type of a failure to resolve a promise? Should we mention that type (if it exists).

There isn't one. This is kind of a key difference from promises in other systems: it's not possible to handle the rejection of an output. This isn't really intentional, and we may want to reconsider it.

Reviewer 2: I think that `represents the result of an asynchronous computation or it's failure` (I parse it `represents the result of ((an asynchronous computation) | (it's failure))` implies that `Promise<T>` is really `Promise<T, E> where E: Error`.

In light of your response, I would instead say that 
```
A value of type `Promise<T>` represents the result of a asynchronous computation.
```
 While a promise may of course fail, it doesn't seem like that failure is part of (can be represented in) the Pulumi type system.

Author: I had the same thought :)

> A value of type `Promise<T>` represents the result of an asynchronous computation. Note
> that although computations may fail, failures cannot be handled at runtime, and cause a
> hard stop when attempting to access a `Promise<T>`'s concrete value.

asynchronous computation or its failure.

## `Output<T>`

Perhaps the most important type in the Pulumi type system is `Output<T>`. A value of type
`Output<T>` represents a node in a Pulumi program graph, and behaves like a `Promise<T>`
that carries additional metadata that describes the resources on which the value depends,
whether the value is known or unknown, and whether or not the value is secret. Readers
familiar with functional programming will recognize `Output<T>` as a monad.

### Dependencies

If an `Output<T>` value is the result of a resource operation--e.g. if it is an output
property of some resource--it is said to _depend_ on that resource.

If a value of type `Output<T>` depends on a resource `R`, the result of any computation
that depends on its concrete value also depends on `R`.

### Unknowns 

An `Output<T>` may be unknown if it depends on the result of a resource operation that
will not be run because it is part of a `pulumi preview`. Previews typically produce for
properties with values that cannot be determined until the resource is actually created or
updated.

If a value of type `Output<T>` is unknown, any computation that depends on its concrete

> value must not run, and may produce an unknown `Output<T>`.

Reviewer 2: Can such a depending value produce a known `Output<T>`?

Author: The wording here is a bit obtuse, and was intended to leave the door open for nested unknowns--something that we use in practice, but something that isn't directly addressed in the doc and that I was hoping to leave out of the abstract model. Nested unknowns--i.e. unknown values inside of otherwise known object/map/array outputs--arise pretty frequently when dealing with previews, where they may be produced by resource providers as part of previewing a create or update operation.

Given the definitions in the current doc, the value inside a single output is either fully known or fully unknown. Given those semantics, the only way to build a partially-knowable value is to use nested outputs. This is essentially the mirror of `inputShape`, but for outputs, so let's look at the `Array<string>` example from the output perspective: if we want to produce an `Output<Array<string>>` where each element may be known or unknown, we need to use a type like `Output<Union<Array<string>, Array<Output<string>>>>`, or simply `Output<Array<Output<string>>>`. Projecting these types is pretty raw and unwieldy, as they can requires a great deal of unwrapping as nesting depth increases.

Instead of projecting these types, the various SDKs tend to opt to project the simpler `Output<Array<string>>` type, and use an internal representation for the concrete value that includes distinguished unknown values. This approach allows the SDKs to allow e.g. lifted property and element access into partially-known composite values. For example, the Node SDK will allow the user to access an element of an `Output<[]string>` via a proxied index operator even if some elements of the array are unknown, though it will _not_ allow the user to access the entire value via `apply`.

So to answer your original question: at the model level, "may produce an unknown" should be "must produce an unknown". I'll change the wording and work on adding a brief section regarding nested `Ouptut<T>` values after the combinators.

### Secrets

> An `Output<T>` may be makred as secret if its concrete value contains sensitive

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An `Output<T>` may be marked as secret if its concrete value contains sensitive
```

```rust
fn inputShape(T) {
	match T {
		_ => Input<T>,
		Array<T> => Union<Input<Array<T>>, Array<inputShape(T)>>,
		Map<T> => Union<Input<Map<T>>, Map<inputShape(T)>>,
		Union<...T> => Union<map(...T, t => inputShape(t))>,
		Promise<T> => Input<T>,
		Output<T> => Input<T>,
		Object<...P> => Object<map(...P, (name, t) => (name, inputShape(t)))>
	}
}
```

Resource input properties often use input-shaped types.

## `Output<T>` Combinators

The rules described for working with `Output<T>` metadata--[dependencies], [unknowns], and
[secrets]--require special bookkeeping on the part of the consumer. There are three
primitive combinators that aid in this bookkeeping: [`apply`](#applyt-u), [`all`](#allt),
and [`unwrap`](#unwrapt).

### `apply<T, U>`

The `apply` API allows its caller to access the concrete value of an `Output<T>` within
the context of a caller-supplied callback.

`apply` trivially obeys the `Output<T>` rules for [dependencies], [unknowns], and
[secrets]:

- the dependencies of the `Output<T>` argument are propagated to the result
- if the `Output<T>` argument is unknown, the callback is not run and the result is unknown

> - if the `Output<T>` argument is secret, the result is secret.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I would put a period here. I think it's a grey area.

Author: Removed.

## `Promise<T>`

A value of type `Promise<T>` represents the result of an asynchronous computation. Note
that although computations may fail, failures cannot be handled at runtime, and cause a
hard stop when attempting to access a `Promise<T>`'s concrete value.

## `Output<T>`

Perhaps the most important type in the Pulumi type system is `Output<T>`. A value of type
`Output<T>` represents a node in a Pulumi program graph, and behaves like a `Promise<T>`
that carries additional metadata that describes the resources on which the value depends,
whether the value is known or unknown, and whether or not the value is secret. Readers
familiar with functional programming will recognize `Output<T>` as a monad.

### Dependencies

If an `Output<T>` value is the result of a resource operation--e.g. if it is an output
property of some resource--it is said to _depend_ on that resource.

If a value of type `Output<T>` depends on a resource `R`, the result of any computation
that depends on its concrete value also depends on `R`.

### Unknowns 

An `Output<T>` may be unknown if it depends on the result of a resource operation that

> will not be run because it is part of a `pulumi preview`. Previews typically produce for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
will not be run because it is part of a `pulumi preview`. Previews typically produce unknown for
```

Pretty sure a word was omitted here

Author: Fixed

properties with values that cannot be determined until the resource is actually created or
updated.

If a value of type `Output<T>` is unknown, any computation that depends on its concrete
value must not run, and must instead produce an unknown `Output<T>`.

### Secrets

An `Output<T>` may be marked as secret if its concrete value contains sensitive
information.

If a value of type `Output<T>` is secret, the result of any computation that depends on

> its concrete value must also be secret.

Reviewer 4: Should probably also clarify the behavior for Array<T> and Map<T>. i.e., if any element is secret, then all of the elements are secret because ordering is not static.

Author: This is covered in the `outputShape` docs. For the purposes of the abstract type system, secret elements must be made explicit through the use of nested outputs, though the language SDKs tend to deal with this implicitly in their projections of the type system.

to a single value, it is necessary to represent composite metadata using nested `Output<T>`
types. Consider a variant of the `Array<string>` example from [`inputShape(T)`](#inputshapet):
in order to produce an array where each element may be an output, we need to use the type
`Output<Array<Output<string>>>`.

The `outputShape` type constructor defines an algorithm for producing these sorts of values.

```rust
fn outputShape(T) {
	match T {
		_ => Output<T>,
		Array<U> => Output<Array<outputShape(U)>>,
		Map<U> => Output<Map<outputShape(U)>>,
		Union<...U> => Union<map(...U, u => outputShape(u))>,
		Promise<U> => Output<U>,
		Output<U> => Output<U>,
		Object<...P> => Output<Object<map(...P, (name, u) => (name, outputShape(u)))>>
	}
}
```

Resource output properties often use output-shaped types.

Projecting output-shaped is a bit unwieldy, as values of these types often require a great
deal of unwrapping as nesting depth increases.

Instead of projecting these types in their fully-elaborated form, the various language SDKs
tend to opt to project them as a simple `Output<T>` while using an internal representation

> for the concrete value that includes distinguished unknown values. This approach lets the
> SDKs to allow e.g. lifted property and element access into partially-known composite

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for the concrete value that includes distinguished unknown values. This approach allows the
SDKs to use e.g. lifted property and element access into partially-known composite
```

Author: I'm going to leave this one as-is.

Reviewer: It doesn't read right as-is. Specifically the words: `This approach lets the SDKS to allow...` - Maybe just `This approach lets the SDKs allow...`

Author: ahhhh, yeah, the "to" in there is leftover from an earlier phrasing.

primitive combinators that aid in this bookkeeping: [`apply`](#applyt-u), [`all`](#allt),
and [`unwrap`](#unwrapt).

### `apply<T, U>`

The `apply` API allows its caller to access the concrete value of an `Output<T>` within
the context of a caller-supplied callback.

`apply` trivially obeys the `Output<T>` rules for [dependencies], [unknowns], and
[secrets]:

- the dependencies of the `Output<T>` argument are propagated to the result
- if the `Output<T>` argument is unknown, the callback is not run and the result is unknown
- if the `Output<T>` argument is secret, the result is secret

Note that the argument for `U` may itself be an `Output<V>`, in which case the return type
of `apply` will be `Output<Output<V>>`. The result can be unwrapped using the
[`unwrap`](#unwrapt) combinator. A language SDK may opt to automatically unwrap such values
if its type system is flexible enough to express the unwrapping.

This API is morally equivalent to Javascript's `Promise.then` API, but with `Output<>`s in
the place of `Promise<>`s:

```typescript
class Output<T> {
	public apply<U>(func: (t: T) => U): Output<U> {
		...
	}
}
```

### `all<T...>`

> The `all` API combines multiple heterogenous outputs into a single array output. The

Reviewer: Not always an array, sometimes a mapping (at least in python, and I thought also in TS but unsure of this)

Author: Yeah--the language SDKs generally implement a more flexible version of `all`.

To be frank, I'm not entirely convinced that the type system docs even need `all`, as I _think_ it can be described in terms of `apply` and `unwrap`. It seemed like a nice thing to have, though, and given that it's here it should probably include the `Map<>` case (or the `Map<>` case should be described in a separate combinator).

Reviewer: It does seem nice to have, agreed.

metadata from the arguments is combined as per the `Output<T>` rules for [dependencies],
[unknowns], and [secrets]:

- the result of `all` depends on the union of the dependencies of its `Output<>` arguments
- if any of the `Output<>` arguments is unknown, the result is unknown

> - if any of the `Output<>` arguments is secret, the callback is not run and the result is

Reviewer 4: Result is unknown, or secret?

Author: Secret--good catch!
